intro_file: topvideo_LOOP.mp4

h1: Geelong Project Hed
h2: Dek
byline: By Neal Morton

[+sections]
[.+text]
GEELONG, Australia -- Over the next month, as summer winds down on this coastal city, the staff at seven schools here will interrupt homeroom periods, ask students to put away assignments and hand them a mandatory survey.

Teachers and translators will walk around and help explain the questions, some intrusive and deeply personal: How often do you go to bed hungry? When was the last time you crashed on a friend’s couch? Do you feel safe at home?

The survey isn’t anonymous, and students may wonder why their school needs such information. But there’s a reason for the prying prompts -- prevention, and a chance to steer young people away from dropping out of school or becoming homeless.

“Youth homelessness in Australia and around the world is just such a massive issue,” said Kylie Hodgson. “And there just has to be something to be done to stop it.”

Like Seattle, this port city of about 280,000 has struggled to absorb a flood of new workers and residents. A popular waterfront park straddles Geelong’s only youth shelter and its first pair of gleaming apartment and office towers.
[]

{.figure}
file: example.jpg
caption: Geelong scene setters
{}

[.+text]
But twice a week, Hodgson drives past a shuttered Ford factory and into a neighborhood identified as one of Australia’s most disadvantaged. There, she meets with dozens of students at Northern Bay College, an early adopter in a regional effort to keep young people off the streets and in school. The approach will soon find a new home in King County.

The idea behind it sounds simple: Early intervention. The student surveys trigger a series of solutions -- from group counseling to emergency aid -- designed to prevent young people from teetering into homelessness.

“Think about it as a seesaw,” said Anne-Marie Ryan, who leads the Geelong Region Local Learning and Employment Network.

On one side, she said, are kids still in school, with families. But students who already dropped out or left home tip the other side down. “Our goal is to reweight the seesaw with a lot more early intervention,” Ryan said, “and over time we’ve seen the balance tip the other way.”

The simplicity is deceptive -- especially given the urgency of addressing homelessness back home.
[]

h3: ‘Not a quick fix’

[.+text]
In Seattle, where images of needles and tents have come to symbolize decay, the debate around addressing homelessness often focuses on the need for more housing. Some call for increasing police enforcement to clear out encampments. Or, in other words, clean up the streets.

On a recent visit to Geelong, the songs of Australia’s native birds echoed through streets that seemed empty over the course of two weeks. City parks -- which families filled during a public holiday for a horse race -- also appeared deserted overnight.

Few residents had heard of the Geelong Project -- a program that, when successful, solves a problem before anyone sees it, at an annual cost of about $275,000 to $350,000 American dollars.

Since 2013, the number of youth entering Geelong’s homeless system has been sliced nearly in half. And dropouts have also declined, by 20% as of 2018.
[]

partial: outcomes

[.+text]
“The thing with early intervention: It’s not a quick fix. It’s something that is quite slow,” said Sandy Meessen, team leader of The Geelong Project. “It’s taken six years for us to see that real big deduction in young people coming through the youth entry point.”

Those results inspired the Geelong Project’s spread across Australia; in Ontario, Canada; and now, the U.S. About 3,000 students last November took an initial round of surveys in a suburban school district west of Minneapolis. And in South King County, the Highline and Tukwila school districts will launch pilots next fall.

Seattle initially embraced the idea. But concerns over conflicts of interest and red tape stalled it -- for now.
[]

partial: comparisons

[.+text]
The program has skeptics. In Geelong, some educators wonder if it duplicates their work. In King County, advocates question what relevant solutions a city as homogeneous as Geelong can offer a more diverse population here.

QUOTE HERE?

But as local leaders prepare to bet on an idea that seems promising down under, they can learn from its rocky start in Geelong -- and they’ll have to rethink three decades of federal policy that largely intervenes only after people lose their housing.

“The notion that we have to wait so long, it’s both immoral and ineffective,” said Barbara Duffield, executive director of SchoolHouse Connection, a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit working to overcome homelessness through education. “And it’s failing in spectacular fashion.”
[]

[]

:skip

HOWDUNNIT

It was 2011, and rising homelessness in nearby Melbourne was spilling into Geelong.

At the time, nearly 1,000 out of about 23,000 young adults experienced homelessness there. Only 2% ever returned home after securing short-term housing, and up to 250 dropped out of school each year. Youth unemployment topped 30%.

That prompted local service providers and community leaders to come together, and over two years, debate solutions.

“Of course everyone invited to that talking table thought their organization was the most important piece,” Ryan said. “You can’t actually deal in pieces. You have to deal in wholes.”

They arrived at a common understanding: To get help, young people had to navigate a patchwork of agencies, telling their stories over and over again. One student could seek mental health counseling, but that didn’t address a looming eviction or their parents’ losing a job.

Aside from housing instability, the conversation also found another lever to pull -- dropouts. Research has found that young adults without a diploma or GED are 4.5 times more likely to report experiencing homelessness.

The group pivoted to a community coalition, one that connects schools and “upstream” services through a central clearinghouse. To find the students in need, they designed the schoolwide surveys.

After students take the survey, a team from a local youth agency interviews them through a universal screener, scores each response and ranks them on three tiers of risk.

The lowest level includes infrequent check-ins and group sessions on bullying, domestic violence and self-esteem. Students at the top tier get paired with workers like Hodgson, who meet them weekly and find the existing services -- rental assistance, therapy, tutors -- that will keep them off the streets and in school.

VIDEO LOOP OF GROUP SESSION

“It’s a bespoke response to your individual need,” said Northern Bay principal Ken Massari, who welcomed the Geelong Project to his campus six years ago. Now, he said, “young people only need to tell their story once.”

A graduate of Northern Bay himself, Massari shared a history lesson of the neighborhood: When the Ford plant opened after World War I, veterans streamed into the sleepy tourist town for work in Geelong’s growing industrial hub. Families, including his, could afford new homes close to Corio Bay -- which the local Aboriginal people called “Jillong.”

Today, many refugees and asylum-seekers live in those same, now-dilapidated homes. And the children they send to school, Massari said, often carry the burden of generational poverty and trauma with them to class. So too with the 150 or so Aboriginal students at Northern Bay.

NORTHERN BAY SCHOOL VIDEO LOOP

“They don’t call their life poverty,” Massari said. But, “it’s often compounded, that disadvantage upon disadvantage.”

“The demand for (school) staff to deal with all that...to do any of it justice, just takes a long time,” he added.

The Geelong Project in action

Down the hall from Massari’s office, a poster in a makeshift office declares, “What you say in here...stays in here.”

The poster hovered over Hodgson’s head as her phone buzzed with a text message from a 16-year-old who contemplated running away from home.

“Don’t be surprised if I just shut down on you,” the text warned.

The young woman’s message didn’t surprise Hodgson, who had met with her for months.

This visit, Hodgson pulled out a drawing of a bucket overflowing with a rainbow of scribbled bars. The student had colored each with a corresponding key to visualize the escalating crises in her life: An abusive father who came and went. Months of overdue schoolwork. Nightmares that kept her awake.

The latest development: Dad left again, possibly for good.

“It sucks, all that stuff about Dad,” Hodgson said.

“We can’t change that,” the young woman replied.

In recent weeks, with Hodgson’s help, she got back on track to graduate on time. She learned to balance the demands of work and home and school. She even started dreaming of how she would spend a gap year before enrolling in university.

“It’s an exciting time for you, despite being a bad year,” Hodgson said.

Hodgson steered the conversation to Mom, asking where things stood with her.

B had grown estranged from her mother, who she said wouldn’t acknowledge her father’s threats. Now, though, the pair had started talking again, and B even considered asking for permission to take the art therapy Hodgson recommended.

“You don’t want to leave anymore! That’s really good,” Hodgson exclaimed.

“I’m really happy today,” she added. “Think how you’ve come a long way.”

LOOP OF KYLIE STUDENT MEETING

The student indulged a brief smile, grabbed her backpack and headed back to class.

“We’re not teachers,” Hodgson said. “We’re not an authoritative role. We’re not a parent.

“We’re sort of just someone that’s just there for that young person and whatever they want,” she added. “It’s just a series of lots of little things that hopefully build up.”

A foundation of support

Outside Hodgson’s makeshift office, a large banner hangs prominently on a hallway window: “Welcome to the Wellbeing Centre,” it reads, with hearts filling the holes of each O.

Students walk by similar banners in Geelong’s other secondary schools, and they represent a key contrast to public education in the U.S. and Washington.

“Schools these days, they have to be everything,” said Laura Vecchio, who last year joined the Geelong Project at its first early-intervention worker focused on mental health.

In every country, students typically don’t leave their personal problems at home. But in Geelong, schools often dedicate entire wings or annex buildings on campus for their wellbeing teams. Backed by state funding, principals fill each team with full-time psychologists, social workers, counselors, doctors, nurses and first-aid workers.

“It’s where we share that information and share that knowledge about students and their families,” Meessen said of the wellbeing centers. “They’re a critical part in putting place (our) plans or different ways of working with young people in that school.”

In Washington, meanwhile, the state provides schools with a fraction of the funding for even one wellbeing position. A high school, for example, needs to enroll 40,000 students to generate enough money to hire a social worker.

The federal government also pitches in, with cash assistance for low-income youth and their families and free or cheap access to mental-health services. Still, Vecchio said local waitlists often top three months.

“I can put them on that waitlist, but what can we do then?” Vecchio said. “Their anxiety and depression only gets bigger.

“The stuff that we’re doing -- that early intervention -- helps them get out of bed, helps them get the services so their mental health doesn’t become so obvious to the outside.”

During what she described as a typical Tuesday, Vecchio encountered a steady stream of students entering the wellbeing center.

One young woman approached with red eyes. After helping her through a breakup, Vecchio guided a pair of boys into a quiet room to talk them out of a looming fight.

“What’s the surprise now?” she asked as another appeared.

16-year-old Tyson Myczka didn’t have a problem. He wanted to share some recent artwork, an idea Vecchio had encouraged to keep his thoughts away from suicide.

PHOTO OF TYSON

Before Vecchio reached out to help, Tyson said he often spent his time outside school alone in his room with the lights off. Anxiety and depression made it difficult to maintain a job and social circle.

He credits Vecchio for teaching him how to work through his abandonment issues and the importance of finding a role model after his father left the family.

“The voices in my head, I don’t hear them any longer,” Tyson said. “I don’t need to hide in the dark anymore.”

Caveats

Unlike the staff at Northern Bay, those new to the Geelong Project can’t yet pinpoint ways in which it has been a game-changer at their school.

One principal described it as glitzy, noting it’s too early to tell what value the program’s added. A social worker at another campus warned of “the hype,” saying “we’d survive without it.”

But in a longer conversation she welcomed the free resources.

“The wellbeing office is open for the day-to-day crisis stuff,” she said. “We can’t interview 1,000 kids and pick out the ones who won’t seek us out for help. We can’t take them off campus for the help we can’t provide here.”

Without the wellbeing teams and that foundation of support, could the Geelong Project work here to curb long-term instability? Is our structure just not compatible with an idea that relies on making existing parts work better together?

“It’s not copy and paste,” said Matt Morton, a research fellow with Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago. He’s leading the U.S. pilots of what will be called the Upstream Project and cautioned against scrapping the model because it may not reach the entire student body.

“We try to make very clear that this isn’t a silver bullet,” Morton said.

While Geelong schools have more resources, in King County, there’s more bureaucracy.

Each school district has its own central office and locally elected school boards. In Australia, there’s the state then the principals, making it easier for a school to adopt the Geelong Project without prolonged debate and layers of administrative hurdles.

Duffield with the D.C.-based nonprofit said in a place like Seattle, “the cynicism and the state of affairs” could be a big barrier. And getting the Upstream Project off the ground in King County has come in fits and starts.

Seattle Public Schools was initially slated to join the local pilot. But talks crumbled amid concerns over cost and perceived conflicts of interest. At the time, School Board member and now-President Zachary DeWolf was a program manager with All Home, the county’s coordinating agency for homelessness.

The organization was supposed to lead on the Upstream Project. Emails obtained by The Seattle Times show DeWolf’s enthusiasm to shepherd Seattle schools into the pilot proved a difficult sell for Superintendent Denise Juneau.

In a statement, the district’s manager of homeless programs said SPS would focus on a partnership with the city, which recently announced a $400,000 contract with the YWCA to provide support for homeless students.

Now, Schoolhouse Washington -- the educational arm of the Seattle-based nonprofit Building Changes -- will coordinate the Upstream pilots.

“Everyone wants to help, but they want to do it their way,” said Mehret Tekle-Awarun, senior manager of education policy for Building Changes.

She’s now working with the Highline and Tukwila school districts to identify the right campuses to launch Upstream next fall. And she worries about how students of color will factor into the early launch.

“Representation matters, especially with service providers,” Tekle-Awarun said.

Building Changes will also have to navigate concerns about student privacy: Who gets to see responses on surveys about students’ home lives?

Perhaps the biggest challenge is time.

“Everybody who lives in our region would love to see a solution that sticks,” said Barber. “We don’t want to shift (strategy) every two to three years, and that’s the anger here: We chase after something for a few years, aren’t happy with it and shift direction again.”

Even if it’s a success, keeping young people and families from becoming homeless won’t change what Seattle’s streets look like for years -- beyond the shelflife of any politician.



GEELONG SUNSET LOOP?